in the UK were eating more rice than
ever in fact we now eat at least four
times more rice and rice products than
we did 40 years ago and many of us do so
because of their healthy reputation but
at the same time I've also noticed lots
of newspaper reports which suggests that
rice has quite high levels of arsenic in
it so is this something I should be
worried about or is it just another
scare story I'd love to find out arsenic
is well known as a poison but most of us
don't realize it occurs naturally in
soil and water so tiny amounts can get
into food levels tend to be higher in
rice because it's grown under flooded
conditions last year the EU brought in
new regulations on the levels allowed in
rice products i'm meeting professor and
EEMA Hogg at Queen's University Belfast
who's been researching the subject for
nearly 20 years
I must admit and it had never ever
occurred to me that there was arsenic in
rice and does it matter I mean sort of
doses you find it in does it really
affect your health totally we know that
low levels chronic exposure to arsenic
causes a wide range of disease and over
lifetime exposure at least increase
risks of cancer we know that if you have
low levels exposure during infancy that
it causes a range of other developmental
problems things immune development it's
gross weights development its IQ
development are all linked to arsenic
exposure Andy has tested levels of
arsenic in different types of rice and
compared them with other cereal crops he
found that white basmati rice has five
times as much arsenic as wheat or barley
mother white rice typically has 10 times
the amount and brown rice 20 times these
levels are all below the new legal limit
set in Europe Andy is still concerned
all they've done is set them at levels
which are typically find in rice so
they've done nothing does she make rice
growers or rice food manufacturers do
anything about it and I would argue very
strongly that they're not fine to have
those levels the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization who advise on acceptable
limits said levels need to be low enough
to protect public health but still allow
sufficient cravin availability of rice
in the developing world
another concern Andy has is with rice
products like rice crackers rice cereals
and baby rice which is many babies first
food rice has become very popular for
giving young children because it's
supposed to be healthy and your thing is
pretty unhealthy I would not want to
pick up my child home and serve rice
because of the arsenic content the legal
limits for arsenic in children's rice
products like baby rice are set at half
the adult amantha but puffed rice
cereals don't have to meet the child
requirements because they are deemed as
not being directly marketed at children
the Food Standards Agency also advises
that children under four and a half
should not be given rice drinks as these
two contain arsenic while some
manufacturers put this on their
packaging there is no legal obligation
to do so what about someone like me I
like rice I like basmati rice you know I
have a couple times a week your actual
exposure is relatively low but there's
many people for many different reasons
taken two three more balls of rice
Pradera equivalents to that and rice
products and if I was doing that day and
diet I certainly would be highly
concerned about my arsenic contain
you